[CNV-63822] cont. Test plan opt-out of role aggregation (#73)
RedHatQE/openshift-virtualization-tests-design-docs: stps/sig-iuo/CNV-63822-role-aggregation-opt-out.md

| **Acceptance Criteria**                | [x]  | (1) When opt-out is enabled, a project admin in a namespace receives Forbidden when attempting virtualization actions (2) When opt-out is enabled, explicit role bindings for admin/edit/view grant the corresponding virtualization access (3) When opt-out is disabled (default), all users with project roles retain automatic access — no change from previous releases (4) Configuration changes persist without cluster restart | Defined in CNV-63822 epic |
| **Non-Functional Requirements (NFRs)** | [x]  | Security: RBAC hardening — users blocked without explicit grant. Backward Compatibility: default unchanged. UI: console changes tracked under CNV-80935. Docs: user-facing documentation required. Performance: N/A — negligible RBAC overhead. Monitoring: N/A — no new metrics/alerts, uses standard Kubernetes RBAC. Scalability: N/A — scales with Kubernetes natively. Observability: N/A — standard audit logging covers RBAC decisions | Upgrade and docs coverage required                    |

#### **2. Known Limitations**

None — reviewed and confirmed with [Name/Date — TBD] that no feature limitations apply for

> this release.

Author: noted

> this release.

Reviewer: please update the placeholder

#### **3. Technology and Design Review**

| Check                            | Done | Details/Notes                                                               | Comments                                         |
|:---------------------------------|:-----|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------|

> | **Developer Handoff/QE Kickoff** | [x]  | [TBD — meeting takeaways must be filled in after kickoff with Dev/Arch]     |                                                  |

Author: completed

| **Technology Challenges**        | [x]  | N/A                                                                         |                                                  |
| **Test Environment Needs**       | [x]  | Standard OCP + CNV cluster with HTPasswd IdP for unprivileged user testing  | No special hardware required                     |

> | **API Extensions**               | [x]  | New cluster-level configuration field to control role aggregation behavior (default: enabled, opt-out: manual) | Tests must validate config changes and downstream RBAC effects |

Author: enabled/manual is exposed to users via config, this is fine. ack

| Testing all individual permission rules within virtualization roles | Individual role rules are not affected by this feature; this feature controls whether roles are aggregated, not the content of the roles themselves | [Name/Date — TBD]  |
| External IdP compatibility (LDAP, Active Directory)       | RBAC logic is IdP-agnostic; HTPasswd testing validates the core permission logic | [Name/Date — TBD]  |
| Multi-tenant cluster scale testing (100+ users)           | RBAC evaluation overhead is negligible; functional correctness at smaller scale is sufficient | [Name/Date — TBD]  |

**Note:** Migrate role aggregation testing is already covered by existing tier 2 regression tests
([test_migration_rights.py](https://github.com/RedHatQE/openshift-virtualization-tests/blob/main/tests/virt/cluster/migration_and_maintenance/rbac_hardening/test_migration_rights.py))
and is therefore documented as existing coverage, not out of scope.

**Test Limitations**

None — reviewed and confirmed that no test limitations apply for this release.

> *Sign-off:* [Name/Date — TBD]

Author: ack, waiting for signoffs

> *Sign-off:* [Name/Date — TBD]

Author: added

| **OCP & OpenShift Virtualization Version(s)** | OCP 4.22 with CNV 4.22         | Target version where feature introduced                            |
| **CPU Virtualization**                        | N/A                            | Not relevant for RBAC testing                                      |
| **Compute Resources**                         | Standard cluster resources     | Minimum per worker: 4 vCPUs, 16GB RAM                              |
| **Special Hardware**                          | N/A                            | No special hardware required                                       |
| **Storage**                                   | Any RWX storage class          | ocs-storagecluster-ceph-rbd-virtualization                         |
| **Network**                                   | Default (OVN-Kubernetes)       | No special network requirements                                    |
| **Required Operators**                        | OpenShift Virtualization       | Standard CNV installation                                          |

> | **Platform**                                  | Any supported platform         |                                                                    |

Author: completed

| Test Environment     | N/A — standard OCP cluster with HTPasswd IdP is sufficient; no special hardware required | N/A                                                                                  | [Name/Date — TBD]  |
| Untestable Aspects   | Cannot test with production identity providers (LDAP, Active Directory, OAuth) in the lab | RBAC logic is IdP-agnostic; HTPasswd validation covers the enforcement path regardless of IdP | [Name/Date — TBD]  |
| Resource Constraints | N/A — no staffing or capacity constraints; feature testing scope is manageable with assigned QE resources | N/A                                                                       | [Name/Date — TBD]  |
| Dependencies         | UI changes ([CNV-80935](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CNV-80935)) are pending; console configuration interface may not be ready for testing | Track progress with UI team (sig-ui); API-level testing can proceed independently of UI | [Name/Date — TBD]  |

> | Other                | N/A — no additional risks identified                                                 | N/A                                                                                     | [Name/Date — TBD]  |

Author: ack, waiting for signoffs

> | Other                | N/A — no additional risks identified                                                 | N/A                                                                                     | [Name/Date — TBD]  |

Author: added

|                |                                                                                                            | Verify that toggling opt-out off after it was enabled restores automatic access for users who previously lost it                                               | tier2 automation | P1       |
| CNV-63822      | As a cluster admin, I want revoking a role binding to immediately remove virtualization access              | Verify that removing an explicit role binding while opt-out is enabled immediately revokes the user's access                                                   | tier2 automation | P1       |

---

### **IV. Sign-off and Approval**

This Software Test Plan requires approval from the following stakeholders:

* **Reviewers:**
  - [QE Lead / @rnester]
  - [sig-iuo representative / @orenc1 @hmeir @OhadRevah @albarker-rh]
  - [sig-ui representative / @gouyang]

* **Approvers:**
  - [QE Manager / @kmajcher-rh @fabiand]
  - [Product Manager / Ronen Sde-Or]

> 

Author: stp is wip

> 

Author: added

    - When opt-out is disabled after being enabled, automatic access is restored for users who were previously blocked
  - *Note any gaps or missing criteria:* None. Defined in CNV-63822 epic.

- [x] **Non-Functional Requirements (NFRs)**
  - *List applicable NFRs and their targets:*
    - Security: RBAC hardening — users blocked without explicit grant
    - Backward Compatibility: default unchanged
    - UI: console changes tracked under CNV-80935
    - Docs: upstream docs available; downstream docs planned for 4.22
  - *Note any NFRs not covered and why:*
    - Performance: N/A — negligible RBAC overhead
    - Monitoring: N/A — no new metrics/alerts, uses standard Kubernetes RBAC
    - Scalability: N/A — scales with Kubernetes natively
    - Observability: N/A — standard audit logging covers RBAC decisions

#### **2. Known Limitations**

The limitations are documented to ensure alignment between development, QA, and product teams.
The following are confirmed product constraints accepted before testing begins.

None — reviewed and confirmed with [Name/Date — TBD] that no feature limitations apply for
this release.

> 

Reviewer 2: Ronen Sde-Or - May 13th 2026

#### **3. Technology and Design Review**

- [x] **Developer Handoff/QE Kickoff**
  - *Key takeaways and concerns:* We agreed on the testing strategy and configuration requirements.

- [x] **Technology Challenges**
  - *List identified challenges:* N/A
  - *Impact on testing approach:* N/A

- [x] **API Extensions**
  - *List new or modified APIs:* New cluster-level configuration field to control role
    aggregation behavior (default: enabled, opt-out: manual).
  - *Testing impact:* Tests must validate config changes and downstream RBAC effects.

- [x] **Test Environment Needs**
  - *See environment requirements in Section II.3 and testing tools in Section II.3.1*

- [x] **Topology Considerations**
  - *Describe topology requirements:* Feature is cluster-scoped and topology-independent.
  - *Impact on test design:* Works on all topologies (standard, SNO, compact).

### **II. Software Test Plan (STP)**

This STP serves as the **overall roadmap for testing**, detailing the scope, approach, resources,
and schedule.

#### **1. Scope of Testing**

**Testing Goals**

> - **[P0]** Verify a cluster administrator can enable role aggregation opt-out and the setting is applied to the virtualization deployment

Reviewer 2: I think the language might be a bit confusing. Do you mean:
"Verify a cluster administrator can opt-out (disable) role aggregation and the setting is applied to the virtualization deployment"  ?

Author: yes, fixed

- **[P0]** Verify a cluster administrator can switch the aggregation mode and the change propagates to the virtualization deployment
- **[P0]** Verify that removing the aggregation configuration resets the virtualization deployment to its original unconfigured state

> - **[P0]** Verify that when opt-out is enabled, an unprivileged user with a project admin role cannot perform virtualization admin actions (receives Forbidden error)

Reviewer 2: Maybe we should say (in the 2 lines below as well):
... when role aggregation is disabled (opt-out)...

Author: fixed

- **[P0]** Verify that when opt-out is enabled, an unprivileged user with an edit role cannot perform virtualization edit actions (receives Forbidden error)
- **[P0]** Verify that when opt-out is enabled, an unprivileged user with a view role cannot perform virtualization view actions (receives Forbidden error)

> - **[P0]** Verify that disabling opt-out after it was enabled restores automatic access for users who were previously blocked

Reviewer 2: Maybe this should be:
"Verify that enabling role aggregation after it was opt-out (disabled) ..."
Instead of "Verify that disabling opt-out after it was enabled ..."

Author: fixed

**Out of Scope (Testing Scope Exclusions)**

The following items are explicitly Out of Scope for this test cycle and represent intentional
exclusions. No verification activities will be performed for these items, and any related issues
found will not be classified as defects for this release.

- **Testing OpenShift RBAC infrastructure itself**
  - *Rationale:* Core RBAC evaluation is the responsibility of the OCP platform team; no duplication of their test effort
  - *PM/Lead Agreement:* [Name/Date — TBD]

- **Testing all individual permission rules within virtualization roles**
  - *Rationale:* Individual role rules are not affected by this feature; this feature controls whether roles are aggregated, not the content of the roles themselves
  - *PM/Lead Agreement:* [Name/Date — TBD]

- **External IdP compatibility (LDAP, Active Directory)**
  - *Rationale:* RBAC logic is IdP-agnostic; HTPasswd testing validates the core permission logic
  - *PM/Lead Agreement:* [Name/Date — TBD]

- **Multi-tenant cluster scale testing (100+ users)**
  - *Rationale:* RBAC evaluation overhead is negligible; functional correctness at smaller scale is sufficient

>   - *PM/Lead Agreement:* [Name/Date — TBD]

Reviewer 2: Ronen Sde-Or - 5/13/2026

**Test Limitations**

> None — reviewed and confirmed that no test limitations apply for this release.

Reviewer 2: Ronen Sde-Or - 5/13/2026

#### **3.1. Testing Tools & Frameworks**

- **Test Framework:** Standard

- **CI/CD:** N/A

- **Other Tools:** N/A

#### **4. Entry Criteria**

The following conditions must be met before testing can begin:

- [ ] Requirements and design documents are **approved and merged**
- [ ] Test environment can be **set up and configured** (see Section II.3 - Test Environment)
- [x] Upstream implementation **merged** (role aggregation opt-out support)
- [x] Downstream implementation **complete** (configuration field available in cluster settings)
- [x] Developer Handoff/QE Kickoff meeting completed

#### **5. Risks**

**Timeline/Schedule**

- **Risk:** N/A
  - **Mitigation:** Feature implementation is complete upstream and downstream; no schedule risk.

**Test Coverage**

- **Risk:** Cannot exhaustively test all RBAC role combinations and permission permutations.
  - **Mitigation:** Focus on the 3 critical role levels (admin, edit, view) covering acceptance criteria; individual permission rules within roles are unaffected by this feature.
  - *Areas with reduced coverage:* Individual permission rules within each virtualization role; only role-level access is validated.

>   - *Sign-off:* [Name/Date — TBD]

Reviewer 2: Ronen Sde-Or - 5/13/2026

**Test Environment**

- **Risk:** N/A
  - **Mitigation:** Standard OCP cluster with HTPasswd IdP is sufficient; no special hardware or infrastructure required.

**Untestable Aspects**

- **Risk:** Cannot test with production identity providers (LDAP, Active Directory, OAuth) in the lab.
  - **Mitigation:** RBAC logic is IdP-agnostic; HTPasswd validation covers the enforcement path regardless of IdP.
  - *Alternative validation approach:* Functional validation with HTPasswd covers the RBAC enforcement path regardless of IdP.

>   - *Sign-off:* [Name/Date — TBD]

Reviewer 2: Ronen Sde-Or - 5/13/2026

### **Feature Overview**

By default, all project administrators, editors, and viewers automatically receive access to
OpenShift Virtualization resources. Role Aggregation Opt-Out allows cluster administrators to
disable this automatic access and instead grant virtualization permissions explicitly per user
and namespace, enabling fine-grained control in multi-tenant environments.

---

### **I. Motivation and Requirements Review (QE Review Guidelines)**

This section documents the mandatory QE review process. The goal is to understand the feature's value,
technology, and testability before formal test planning.

#### **1. Requirement & User Story Review Checklist**

- [x] **Review Requirements**
  - *List the key D/S requirements reviewed:* Cluster admins can limit the access to virtualization components

- [x] **Understand Value and Customer Use Cases**
  - *Describe the feature's value to customers:* Enables tenant isolation by requiring
  explicit virtualization access grants instead of automatic role aggregation.
  - *List the customer use cases identified:*
    - As a cluster administrator, I want to disable automatic virtualization access

>       so that only explicitly authorized users can consume virtualization resources

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      so that only explicitly authorized users can use and interact with virtualization resources
```

- [x] **Testability**
  - *Note any requirements that are unclear or untestable:* All requirements are testable
    through standard API and RBAC validation.

- [x] **Acceptance Criteria**
  - *List the acceptance criteria:*

>     - When opt-out is enabled, users with project admin, edit, or view roles in a namespace are forbidden from attempting virtualization actions

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - When opt-out is enabled, users with project admin, edit, or view roles in a namespace are forbidden from performing actions on virtualization resources
```

  - *Note any gaps or missing criteria:* None. Defined in CNV-63822 epic.

- [x] **Non-Functional Requirements (NFRs)**
  - *List applicable NFRs and their targets:*
    - Security: RBAC hardening — users blocked without explicit grant
    - Backward Compatibility: default unchanged
    - UI: console changes tracked under CNV-80935

>     - Docs: user-facing documentation required

Reviewer 3: upstream docs are available: https://kubevirt.io/user-guide/cluster_admin/authorization/#rbac-role-aggregation
downstream docs will be added as well for 4.22

Author: updated

- [x] **Topology Considerations**
  - *Describe topology requirements:* Feature is cluster-scoped and topology-independent.
  - *Impact on test design:* Works on all topologies (standard, SNO, compact).

### **II. Software Test Plan (STP)**

This STP serves as the **overall roadmap for testing**, detailing the scope, approach, resources,
and schedule.

#### **1. Scope of Testing**

**Testing Goals**

- **[P0]** Verify a cluster administrator can enable role aggregation opt-out and the setting is applied to the virtualization deployment
- **[P0]** Verify a cluster administrator can switch the aggregation mode and the change propagates to the virtualization deployment
- **[P0]** Verify that removing the aggregation configuration resets the virtualization deployment to its original unconfigured state
- **[P0]** Verify that when opt-out is enabled, an unprivileged user with a project admin role cannot perform virtualization admin actions (receives Forbidden error)
- **[P0]** Verify that when opt-out is enabled, an unprivileged user with an edit role cannot perform virtualization edit actions (receives Forbidden error)

> - **[P0]** Verify that when opt-out is enabled, an unprivileged user with a view role cannot perform virtualization view actions (receives Forbidden error)

Reviewer 3: i would add a small test case in which when opt-out is enabled (i.e. `.spec.roleAggregationStrategy` is set to `Manual` in Hyperconverged CR), a project admin can access virtualization resources on his project, if he's being assigned with a RoleBinding for the `kubevirt.io:admin` ClusterRole.
it means that cluster-admins can grant explicit permissions to individual users, when the kubevirt RBAC aggregation is disabled, as per feature requirement.

Author: that falls under regression testing since the `kubevirt.io:admin` role granting permissions already exists. since the new feature changes how the roles are aggregated and not the permissions of the `kubevirt.io roles`, it should be covered by upstream tests

Reviewer 4: can you link the test in the comment here for ref?

Author: https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/blob/main/tests/access_test.go

- **[P0]** Verify that disabling opt-out after it was enabled restores automatic access for users who were previously blocked

**Regression Goals**

- **[P0]** Verify existing RBAC and migration functionality is not broken by the new feature — tier 2 regression suites run on the feature cluster, including migration rights tests

**Out of Scope (Testing Scope Exclusions)**

The following items are explicitly Out of Scope for this test cycle and represent intentional
exclusions. No verification activities will be performed for these items, and any related issues
found will not be classified as defects for this release.

- **Testing OpenShift RBAC infrastructure itself**
  - *Rationale:* Core RBAC evaluation is the responsibility of the OCP platform team; no duplication of their test effort

>   - *PM/Lead Agreement:* [Name/Date — TBD]

Reviewer: please fill all sign offs

Author: fixed

  - *Priority:* P0

- **[CNV-63822]** — As a cluster admin, I want to enable opt-out so unprivileged users cannot access virtualization resources
  - *Test Scenario:* [Tier 2] Verify an unprivileged user with project admin role cannot perform virtualization admin actions when opt-out is enabled (receives Forbidden error)
  - *Priority:* P0

  - *Test Scenario:* [Tier 2] Verify an unprivileged user with edit role cannot perform virtualization edit actions when opt-out is enabled (receives Forbidden error)
  - *Priority:* P0

  - *Test Scenario:* [Tier 2] Verify an unprivileged user with view role cannot perform virtualization view actions when opt-out is enabled (receives Forbidden error)
  - *Priority:* P0

- **[CNV-63822]** — As a cluster admin, I want to disable opt-out to restore default behavior
  - *Test Scenario:* [Tier 2] Verify that disabling opt-out restores automatic access for previously blocked users
  - *Priority:* P0

---

### **IV. Sign-off and Approval**

This Software Test Plan requires approval from the following stakeholders:

* **Reviewers:**

>   - QE Lead / @rnester

Reviewer: nit: rnetser :)

Author: fixed

  - sig-iuo representative / @orenc1 @hmeir @OhadRevah @rlobillo

>   - sig-ui representative / @gouyang

Reviewer: please check with the ui team for another representative

Author: reached out

# Openshift-virtualization-tests Test plan

## **Role Aggregation Opt-Out - Quality Engineering Plan**

### **Metadata & Tracking**

- **Enhancement(s):** [Kubevirt VEP](https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements/issues/160)
- **Feature Tracking:** [CNV-50792](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CNV-50792)
- **Epic Tracking:** [CNV-63822](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CNV-63822)
- **QE Owner(s):** Ramon Lobillo (@rlobillo), Alex Barker (@albarker-rh)

> - **Owning SIG:** sig-iuo (Install, Upgrade, Operators)

Reviewer 4: please add feature Maturity

Author: added

and namespace, enabling fine-grained control in multi-tenant environments.

---

### **I. Motivation and Requirements Review (QE Review Guidelines)**

This section documents the mandatory QE review process. The goal is to understand the feature's value,
technology, and testability before formal test planning.

#### **1. Requirement & User Story Review Checklist**

- [x] **Review Requirements**
  - *List the key D/S requirements reviewed:* Cluster admins can limit the access to virtualization components

- [x] **Understand Value and Customer Use Cases**
  - *Describe the feature's value to customers:* Organizations running multi-tenant clusters
    need to enforce access policies that prevent unauthorized users from consuming
    virtualization resources. Without this feature, any project administrator automatically
    gains full virtualization access, which violates tenant isolation requirements.
  - *List the customer use cases identified:*
    - As a cluster administrator managing a multi-tenant cluster, I want to prevent tenants
      from accessing virtualization workloads they are not eligible to use so that different

>       namespaces can enforce different workload entitlements

Reviewer 4: too many words, lets keep it simple. Something like:

                                                                                                                                                        
```suggestion
- [x] **Understand Value and Customer Use Cases**
    - *Describe the feature's value to customers:* Enables tenant isolation by requiring                                                                                                                       
      explicit virtualization access grants instead of automatic role aggregation.                                                                                                                             
    - *List the customer use cases identified:*                                                                                                                                                                
      - As a cluster administrator, I want to disable automatic virtualization access                                                                                                                          
        so that only explicitly authorized users can consume virtualization resources

Author: sounds good

- [x] **Testability**
  - *Note any requirements that are unclear or untestable:* All requirements are testable
    through standard API and RBAC validation.

- [x] **Acceptance Criteria**
  - *List the acceptance criteria:*

>     - When opt-out is enabled, a project admin in a namespace is forbidden from attempting virtualization actions

Reviewer 4: why mention only admin?
And what about custom roles?

Author: added the other roles. the custom roles shouldnt be relevant because the role aggregation feature determines whether kubevirt roles are aggregated with regular roles

    - Configuration changes take effect without cluster restart
  - *Note any gaps or missing criteria:* None. Defined in CNV-63822 epic.

- [x] **Non-Functional Requirements (NFRs)**
  - *List applicable NFRs and their targets:*
    - Security: RBAC hardening — users blocked without explicit grant
    - Backward Compatibility: default unchanged
    - UI: console changes tracked under CNV-80935
    - Docs: user-facing documentation required
  - *Note any NFRs not covered and why:*
    - Performance: N/A — negligible RBAC overhead
    - Monitoring: N/A — no new metrics/alerts, uses standard Kubernetes RBAC
    - Scalability: N/A — scales with Kubernetes natively
    - Observability: N/A — standard audit logging covers RBAC decisions

#### **2. Known Limitations**

The limitations are documented to ensure alignment between development, QA, and product teams.
The following are confirmed product constraints accepted before testing begins.

None — reviewed and confirmed with [Name/Date — TBD] that no feature limitations apply for
this release.

#### **3. Technology and Design Review**

- [x] **Developer Handoff/QE Kickoff**

>   - *Key takeaways and concerns:* Testing strategy agreed: tier 1 tests validate configuration behavior, with

Reviewer 4: which reconciliation coverage is required? I dont see it anywhere else

Author: it refers to HCO reconciliation, so when the feature is enabled HCO will propagate the feature gate and allow it to be turned on. when i was doing manual testing i had to disable HCO, but now it works with HCO on. should i reword the takeaway and is it necessary to mention anything about HCO stuff in this STP?

    tier 1 tests are not part of gating jobs — further review needed on test prioritization
    for tier 2.

- [x] **Technology Challenges**
  - *List identified challenges:* N/A
  - *Impact on testing approach:* N/A

- [x] **API Extensions**
  - *List new or modified APIs:* New cluster-level configuration field to control role
    aggregation behavior (default: enabled, opt-out: manual).
  - *Testing impact:* Tests must validate config changes and downstream RBAC effects.

- [x] **Test Environment Needs**
  - *See environment requirements in Section II.3 and testing tools in Section II.3.1*

- [x] **Topology Considerations**
  - *Describe topology requirements:* Feature is cluster-scoped and topology-independent.
  - *Impact on test design:* Works on all topologies (standard, SNO, compact).

### **II. Software Test Plan (STP)**

This STP serves as the **overall roadmap for testing**, detailing the scope, approach, resources,
and schedule.

#### **1. Scope of Testing**

**Testing Goals**

- **[P0]** Verify a cluster administrator can enable role aggregation opt-out and the setting is applied to the virtualization deployment

> - **[P0]** Verify a cluster administrator can switch the aggregation mode and the change propagates to the virtualization deployment

Reviewer 4: It pretty much the same, should be masurable

Author: these goals are reflections of the existing tier1 tests which are a bit technically specific so when i took out the technical language they sound the same. there are 3 tests and they do the following:

1. Verify that setting RoleAggregationStrategy to Manual propagates to the KubeVirt CR and adds the OptOutRoleAggregation feature gate
2. Verify that changing RoleAggregationStrategy from Manual to AggregateToDefault propagates to the KubeVirt CR and the OptOutRoleAggregation feature gate persists
3. Verify that removing RoleAggregationStrategy from the HCO spec clears the strategy on the KubeVirt CR and removes the OptOutRoleAggregation feature gate

any suggestions on wording changes?

> - **[P0]** Verify that removing the aggregation configuration resets the virtualization deployment to its original unconfigured state

Reviewer 4: Isen't it the same as the last goal?

Author: see above

- **[P0]** Verify that when opt-out is enabled, an unprivileged user with a project admin role cannot perform virtualization admin actions (receives Forbidden error)
- **[P0]** Verify that when opt-out is enabled, an unprivileged user with an edit role cannot perform virtualization edit actions (receives Forbidden error)
- **[P0]** Verify that when opt-out is enabled, an unprivileged user with a view role cannot perform virtualization view actions (receives Forbidden error)
- **[P0]** Verify that disabling opt-out after it was enabled restores automatic access for users who were previously blocked

**Regression Goals**

> - **[P0]** Verify default behavior is preserved across OpenShift Virtualization z-stream upgrades — sig-iuo upgrade regression suites run on the feature cluster

Reviewer 4: Are you talking about new when enabled by default? If so, I dont think it should be mentined here

Author: ok removing

> - **[P0]** Verify existing RBAC and migration functionality is not broken by the new feature — sig-iuo regression suites (including RBAC hardening and migration rights tests) run on the feature cluster

Reviewer 4: What are` (including RBAC hardening and migration rights tests) run on the feature cluster`?

Author: should just be migration rights tests from https://github.com/RedHatQE/openshift-virtualization-tests/blob/main/tests/virt/cluster/migration_and_maintenance/rbac_hardening/test_migration_rights.py. ill reword it

- **External IdP compatibility (LDAP, Active Directory)**
  - *Rationale:* RBAC logic is IdP-agnostic; HTPasswd testing validates the core permission logic
  - *PM/Lead Agreement:* [Name/Date — TBD]

- **Multi-tenant cluster scale testing (100+ users)**
  - *Rationale:* RBAC evaluation overhead is negligible; functional correctness at smaller scale is sufficient
  - *PM/Lead Agreement:* [Name/Date — TBD]

**Test Limitations**

None — reviewed and confirmed that no test limitations apply for this release.
*Sign-off:* [Name/Date — TBD]

#### **2. Test Strategy**

**Functional**

- [x] **Functional Testing** — Validates that the feature works according to specified requirements and user stories
  - *Details:* Core focus: verify opt-out configuration, RBAC enforcement, and default behavior preservation.

- [x] **Automation Testing** — Confirms test automation plan is in place for CI and regression coverage (all tests are expected to be automated)
  - *Details:* All tier 1 and tier 2 tests automated; tier 1 validates configuration, tier 2 validates end-to-end user workflows.

- [x] **Regression Testing** — Verifies that new changes do not break existing functionality

>   - *Details:* Existing RBAC/migration tests provide regression coverage; standard sig-iuo suites run on feature cluster. Migrate role aggregation is already covered by existing tier 2 regression tests ([test_migration_rights.py](https://github.com/RedHatQE/openshift-virtualization-tests/blob/main/tests/virt/cluster/migration_and_maintenance/rbac_hardening/test_migration_rights.py)). Verification that virtualization admin, edit, and view roles grant correct permissions is covered by existing upstream tests in KubeVirt ([access_test.go](https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/blob/main/tests/access_test.go)).

Reviewer 4: So do we need it also downstream?

Author: it should probably be run on downstream but it doesn't need to be added. that's why i removed the test goals and scenarios referring to it

Author: make it shorter: only include the migration

- [x] **Non-Functional Requirements (NFRs)**
  - *List applicable NFRs and their targets:*
    - Security: RBAC hardening — users blocked without explicit grant
    - Backward Compatibility: default unchanged
    - UI: console changes tracked under CNV-80935
    - Docs: user-facing documentation required
  - *Note any NFRs not covered and why:*
    - Performance: N/A — negligible RBAC overhead
    - Monitoring: N/A — no new metrics/alerts, uses standard Kubernetes RBAC
    - Scalability: N/A — scales with Kubernetes natively
    - Observability: N/A — standard audit logging covers RBAC decisions

#### **2. Known Limitations**

The limitations are documented to ensure alignment between development, QA, and product teams.
The following are confirmed product constraints accepted before testing begins.

None — reviewed and confirmed with [Name/Date — TBD] that no feature limitations apply for
this release.

#### **3. Technology and Design Review**

- [x] **Developer Handoff/QE Kickoff**
  - *Key takeaways and concerns:* The feature is behind a KubeVirt feature-gate. When the
    feature is enabled in Openshift, HCO will automatically add the feature-gate.

>     Implementation details discussed, ready for testing.

Author: disregarding: takeaways from internal meeting are as written, and `default: enabled, opt-out: manual` is user facing in the config

> # Openshift-virtualization-tests Test plan

Reviewer 4: the PR title has "out-out"

Author: fixed

- **Enhancement(s):** [Kubevirt VEP](https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements/issues/160)
- **Feature Tracking:** [CNV-50792](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CNV-50792)
- **Epic Tracking:** [CNV-63822](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CNV-63822)
- **QE Owner(s):** Ramon Lobillo (@rlobillo), Alex Barker (@albarker-rh)
- **Owning SIG:** sig-iuo (Install, Upgrade, Operators)
- **Participating SIGs:** sig-ui

**Document Conventions (if applicable):** N/A — no feature-specific terms required.

### **Feature Overview**

By default, all project administrators, editors, and viewers automatically receive access to
OpenShift Virtualization resources. Role Aggregation Opt-Out allows cluster administrators to
disable this automatic access and instead grant virtualization permissions explicitly per user
and namespace, enabling fine-grained control in multi-tenant environments.

---

### **I. Motivation and Requirements Review (QE Review Guidelines)**

This section documents the mandatory QE review process. The goal is to understand the feature's value,
technology, and testability before formal test planning.

#### **1. Requirement & User Story Review Checklist**

- [x] **Review Requirements**

>   - *List the key D/S requirements reviewed:* As a cluster-admin I want to decide which users

Reviewer 4: It too much. Looks at the stp template.

Should be something like:

"Cluster admins can limit the access to virtualization components"

Author: reduced

    will have access to the virtualization in the cluster. Not all project-admins should have
    this access but only the eligible ones. Per CNV-50792 feature request.

- [x] **Understand Value and Customer Use Cases**

>   - *Describe the feature's value to customers:* A cluster-admin wants to control which users

Reviewer 4: It repets the feature overview.
please rephrase and limit to one customer use case

Author: reworded feature value and removed the second use case

    this access but only the eligible ones. Per CNV-50792 feature request.

- [x] **Understand Value and Customer Use Cases**
  - *Describe the feature's value to customers:* A cluster-admin wants to control which users
    has access to view/create/edit openshift virtualization resources on a given namespace.
    Per CNV-50792 feature request.
  - *List the customer use cases identified:*
    - Multi-tenant clusters — different namespaces are used to allow different workloads and
      prevent unallowed usage of workload that the tenant is not eligible to use
    - Resources usage control — cluster admin wants to get a request to allow a specific user

>       to create VMs and Storage

Author: fixed

    through standard API and RBAC validation.

- [x] **Acceptance Criteria**
  - *List the acceptance criteria:*

>     - When opt-out is enabled, a project admin in a namespace receives Forbidden when

Reviewer 4: admins get Forbidden?

Author: reworded

      attempting virtualization actions

>     - When opt-out is enabled, explicit role bindings for admin/edit/view grant the

Reviewer 4: similar to th eprevious one.
Please specify the specific outcome. and what is "virtualization access"?

Author: differentiated from previous and reworded

      corresponding virtualization access

>     - When opt-out is disabled (default), all users with project roles retain automatic

Reviewer 4: isn't it regression? shouldn't be here

Author: removed

      access — no change from previous releases

>     - Configuration changes persist without cluster restart

Reviewer 4: what does cluster restart means? what is user scenario here?

Author: this means that the configuration changes are immediately in effect and don't require a cluster restart. reworded to reflect that

  - *Note any gaps or missing criteria:* None. Defined in CNV-63822 epic.

- [x] **Non-Functional Requirements (NFRs)**
  - *List applicable NFRs and their targets:*
    - Security: RBAC hardening — users blocked without explicit grant
    - Backward Compatibility: default unchanged
    - UI: console changes tracked under CNV-80935
    - Docs: user-facing documentation required
  - *Note any NFRs not covered and why:*
    - Performance: N/A — negligible RBAC overhead
    - Monitoring: N/A — no new metrics/alerts, uses standard Kubernetes RBAC
    - Scalability: N/A — scales with Kubernetes natively
    - Observability: N/A — standard audit logging covers RBAC decisions

#### **2. Known Limitations**

The limitations are documented to ensure alignment between development, QA, and product teams.
The following are confirmed product constraints accepted before testing begins.

None — reviewed and confirmed with [Name/Date — TBD] that no feature limitations apply for
this release.

#### **3. Technology and Design Review**

- [x] **Developer Handoff/QE Kickoff**

>   - *Key takeaways and concerns:* The feature is behind a KubeVirt feature-gate. When the

Reviewer 4: implementation details shouldn't be on the stp.

Author: revised takeaways to not contain implementation details

**Untestable Aspects**

- **Risk:** Cannot test with production identity providers (LDAP, Active Directory, OAuth) in the lab.
  - **Mitigation:** RBAC logic is IdP-agnostic; HTPasswd validation covers the enforcement path regardless of IdP.
  - *Alternative validation approach:* Functional validation with HTPasswd covers the RBAC enforcement path regardless of IdP.
  - *Sign-off:* [Name/Date — TBD]

**Resource Constraints**

- **Risk:** N/A — no staffing or capacity constraints; feature testing scope is manageable with assigned QE resources.
  - **Mitigation:** N/A
  - *Current capacity gaps:* None
  - *Sign-off:* [Name/Date — TBD]

**Dependencies**

- **Risk:** UI changes ([CNV-80935](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CNV-80935)) are pending; console configuration interface may not be ready for testing.
  - **Mitigation:** Track progress with UI team (sig-ui); API-level testing can proceed independently of UI.
  - *Dependent teams or components:* sig-ui — console configuration interface for opt-out
  - *Sign-off:* [Name/Date — TBD]

**Other**

- **Risk:** N/A — no additional risks identified.
  - **Mitigation:** N/A
  - *Sign-off:* [Name/Date — TBD]

---

> ### **III. Test Scenarios & Traceability**

Reviewer 4: please go over the scenarios and goals, make sure they dont overlap.

Author: removed two scenarios and goals that are overlapping

- **[CNV-63822]** — As a cluster admin, I want to control the role aggregation strategy for virtualization resources

>   - *Test Scenario:* [Tier 1] Verify default behavior is preserved when role aggregation opt-out is not configured — all users retain automatic access

Reviewer 4: Isn't it covered by normal tier1/tier2  tests?

Author: yes, removed

  - *Priority:* P0

  - *Test Scenario:* [Tier 1] Verify default behavior is preserved when aggregation strategy is explicitly set to the default mode
  - *Priority:* P0

  - *Test Scenario:* [Tier 1] Verify that when opt-out mode is enabled, virtualization roles no longer automatically grant access to users
  - *Priority:* P0

  - *Test Scenario:* [Tier 1] Verify that switching from default to opt-out mode removes previously aggregated access from existing roles
  - *Priority:* P0

- **[CNV-63822]** — As a cluster admin, I want to enable opt-out so unprivileged users cannot access virtualization resources
  - *Test Scenario:* [Tier 2] Verify opt-out can be enabled via cluster configuration and the setting persists
  - *Priority:* P0

>   - *Test Scenario:* [Tier 2] Verify an unprivileged user with project admin role cannot perform virtualization admin actions when opt-out is enabled (receives Forbidden error)

Reviewer 4: Should it be one scenario?

Author: per AGENTS.md, if one scenario can fail while another passes, they are separate items

  - *Priority:* P0

  - *Test Scenario:* [Tier 2] Verify an unprivileged user with edit role cannot perform virtualization edit actions when opt-out is enabled (receives Forbidden error)
  - *Priority:* P0

  - *Test Scenario:* [Tier 2] Verify an unprivileged user with view role cannot perform virtualization view actions when opt-out is enabled (receives Forbidden error)
  - *Priority:* P0

- **[CNV-63822]** — As a cluster admin, I want to explicitly grant virtualization permissions to specific users

>   - *Test Scenario:* [Tier 2] Verify a cluster admin can grant virtualization admin permissions to a user in a namespace and the user can perform admin actions

Reviewer 4: ditto, can be generalized to one scenario?

Author: ditto, they're separate because they can fail separately

  - *Priority:* P0

  - *Test Scenario:* [Tier 2] Verify a cluster admin can grant virtualization edit permissions to a user in a namespace and the user can perform edit actions
  - *Priority:* P0

  - *Test Scenario:* [Tier 2] Verify a cluster admin can grant virtualization view permissions to a user in a namespace and the user can view resources
  - *Priority:* P0

- **[CNV-63822]** — As a cluster admin, I want to disable opt-out to restore default behavior
  - *Test Scenario:* [Tier 2] Verify opt-out can be disabled and default automatic access is restored for users
  - *Priority:* P0

  - *Test Scenario:* [Tier 2] Verify that toggling opt-out off after it was enabled restores automatic access for users who previously lost it
  - *Priority:* P1

> - **[CNV-63822]** — As a cluster admin, I want revoking a role binding to immediately remove virtualization access

Reviewer 4: It wasn't the case before this feature?

Author: it was, removed

- **[P0]** Verify that when opt-out is enabled, an unprivileged user with an edit role cannot perform virtualization edit actions (receives Forbidden error)
- **[P0]** Verify that when opt-out is enabled, an unprivileged user with a view role cannot perform virtualization view actions (receives Forbidden error)
- **[P0]** Verify that a cluster administrator can explicitly grant virtualization admin, edit, and view permissions to a user when opt-out is enabled, and the user can perform the corresponding actions
- **[P0]** Verify a cluster administrator can disable role aggregation opt-out and default automatic access is restored
- **[P0]** Verify default behavior (role aggregation enabled) remains unchanged when the feature is not configured
- **[P0]** Verify default behavior is preserved across OpenShift Virtualization z-stream upgrades
- **[P1]** Verify that toggling opt-out off after it was enabled restores automatic access for users who previously lost it
- **[P1]** Verify that removing an explicit role binding while opt-out is enabled immediately revokes the user's virtualization access

> 

Author: added
